.\"	This manual page was written by Jan Schaumann <jschauma@yahoo-inc.com>
.Dd February 05, 2011
.Dt AUTOPW 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm autopw
.Nd cache and re-inject passwords into other programs
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar command
.Sh DESRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility will cache passwords and re-inject them whenever the given command
requires them.
That is, if
.Ar command
prompts for a password,
.Nm
will cache it and then provide that password the next time
.Ar command
asks for it.
.Pp
.Nm
is frequently used to wrap commands invoking
.Xr ssh 1
repeatedly to avoid having the user monitor the command and re-supply
their password when other forms of automation are not possible.
.Sh PROMPTS MATCHED
.Nm
currently matches and distinguishes the following prompts:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
assword:
.It
Enter passphrase for
.It
Bad passphrase, try again
.It
Enter PEM pass phrase:
.It
Enter passphrase:
.It
y,n,(y/n)?
.It
?,??,q
.It
(yes/no)?
.El
.Pp
In the latter examples,
.Nm
will be affirmative instead of supplying a password.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate common usage of this tool.
.Pp
To invoke the command 'foo.sh' and have
.Nm
cache and re-inject any passwords prompted for, run
.Bd -literal -offset indent
autopw sh foo.sh
.Ed
.Sh CAVEATS
Since
.Nm
must keep the password available in memory it is obviously advised against
using this tool on shared hosts.
.Pp
You should only invoke commands that you actually trust --
.Nm
will only respond to specific patterns, and any program that prompts one
of the strings
.Nm
is looking for will be supplied with the given password.
This is particularly concerning when executing commands on a remote,
possibly untrusted host.
.Pp
.Nm
does not play very well with multiple levels of pseudo-terminals (screen
sessions, 'ssh -t' etc.) and may at times print the cleartext password to
the terminal.
.Pp
.Nm
invokes
.Xr perl 1 Ns 's
\'pack/unpack' function for each password provided/injected.
This can become a performance-impacting limitation.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr expect 1 ,
.Xr perl 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility was originally written at Yahoo! Inc.
It not being terribly original or clever, there appeared a number of
variations.
This variant is bundled with the
.Xr scanmaster 1
scripts for convenience.
