.\"	This manual page was originally written by Jan Schaumann
.\"	<jans@yahoo-inc.com> in May 2009.
.Dd June 11, 2020
.Dt SCANHELPER 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm scanhelper
.Nd invoke scanhosts on a scanning node
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Hh
.Op Fl A Ar authmode
.Op Fl d Ar dir
.Op Fl n Ar N
.Op Fl p Ar post
.Op Fl r Ar remote
.Ar scan
.Ar chunkfile
.Op Ar -- scanhost-args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility is part of the "sshscan" suite of scripts.
It represents the portion of the process that runs on each scanning node
and invokes
.Xr scanhosts 1 .
It takes as input the name of a scan and the so-called chunkfile
containing the subset of hosts this scanning node should work on.
.Pp
.Nm
supports the following command-line options:
.Bl -tag -width A_authmode_
.It Fl A Ar authmode
Specify the authentication mode.
Valid options are "all", "password" and "pubkey".
This is passed on to the
.Xr scanshosts 1
command.
.It Fl H
Do not use the headless user for ssh connections.
.It Fl d Ar dir
The directory under which
.Nm
should create all output.
Preferably this is on an NFS share amongst all scanning nodes, though this
is not a technical requirement (it just makes postprocessing of the scan
results an order of magnitude easier).
If not specified, defaults to "/mnt/sshscan".
.It Fl n Ar N
The number of jobs
.Xr scanhosts 1
should execute via its
.Fl n
flag.
If not specified, defaults to 175.
.It Fl p Ar post
The location of the script to be passed to
.Xr scanhosts 1
as the post-processing script.
If not specified, defaults to "./post.chunk.sh".
.It Fl r Ar remote
The location of the script to be passed to
.Xr scanhosts 1
as the script to execute on the remote hosts.
If not specified, defaults to "./remote.sh".
.El
.Pp
It furthermore takes two mandatory arguments:
.Bl -tag -width chunkfile_
.It scan
The name of the scan.
This name is used in a number of places to generate output directories and
files.
.It chunkfile
The path to the file containing the hostnames to be scanned.
.El
.Pp
Any additional arguments are passed on to
.Xr scanhosts 1 .
However, since
.Nm
already uses the following flags, they should not be provided as this may
lead to undefined results:
.Fl n ,
.Fl f ,
.Fl o ,
.Fl s ,
.Fl p ,
.Fl r .
.Sh DETAILS
Upon invocation,
.Nm
sets a few variables based on the environment (see below).
It then starts an
.Xr ssh-agent 1
and invokes
.Xr ssh-add 1 ,
passing the value of the environment variable SSH_ADD_FLAGS.
Next, it creates the output directories in the preferably shared location,
and eventually kicks off
.Xr scanhosts 1
via
.Xr autopw 1 .
When the scanhosts process has terminated, the ssh-agent is killed and the
crontab entries removed.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following examples illustrate common usage of this tool.
.Pp
To run a scan named "scan1", reading a list of hosts to scan from the file
"/tmp/input.list" with the script "remote.sh" from the current working
directory to be executed and the script "../post.chunk.sh" used as a
per-chunk post script:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
scanhelper -r ./remote.sh -p ../post.chunk.sh \\
	scan1 /tmp/input.list
.Ed
.Pp
To run the same scan but pass the flags "-I" and "-S" to
.Xr scanhosts 1
(which is useful when connecting to hosts that are reached via a tunnel,
such as vault hosts):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
scanhelper -r ./remote.sh -p ../post.chunk.sh \\
	scan1 /tmp/input.list -- -I -S
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Nm
honors the following environment variables:
.Bl -tag -width SSH_ADD_FLAGS_
.It SSH_ADD_FLAGS
Flags to be passed to
.Xr ssh-add 1 .
This allows the user to specify custom keys to be added.
.It TMPDIR
The location of a temporary directory.
If not specified, defaults to "/tmp".
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr autopw 1 ,
.Xr checkhosts 1 ,
.Xr scanhosts 1 ,
.Xr ssh-agent 1 ,
.Xr ssh-add 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
utility was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jans@yahoo-inc.com
in July 2007 as "cmd.chunk".
